---
title: "2024-01-21-post-ash"
slug: "post-ash"
date: "2024-01-21"
enableToc: false
tags:
  - building
---

> [!info]
>
> 🌱 來自：[[HSCT]]

# 2024-01-21-post-ash

- How to overcome the OS difference between 7/8 and 8/8 URD?
  - Use of PTCy-based GvHD prophylaxis seems to have resolved previously observed differences in GRFS and OS between 8/8 and 7/8 URD HSCT.
- Choose between URD and Haplo donor.
  - Use of 8/8 URD is preferred, but both 7/8 URD and haploidentical donors are both good options if 8/8 URD does not exist or is not available.
- Alternative graft source with umbilical blood: Omidubicel

  - FDA approved Omidubicel in April 2023, the first UCB product.
  - [[cast regimen.md|CAST regimen]]

- Related and Unrelated Donor Matches (8/8 URD, 7/8 URD) and Half Match or Haploidentical Donor in Allo-HSCT.
- Introduction of Omidubicel, the first expanded Umbilical Cord Blood product rich in Hematopoietic Stem Cells (CD34+ cells).
- Use of Post-Transplantation Cyclophosphamide (PTCy) in Matched Related Donors (MRD), and Matched or Mismatched Unrelated Donors followed by a Therapy Infusion (BMT CTN1703).
- The addition of Abatacept to PTCy with or without Calcineurin Inhibitors (CNI).
- Study on T-cell repertoires following PTCy (BMT CTN 1801).
- Use of Vedolizumab in prevention of lower gastrointestinal acute Graft Versus Host Disease (lGI aGVHD).
- Use of Ruxolitinib and Axatilimab in the treatment of lung GVHD showing a 38% and 47% Overall Response Rate (ORR) respectively.
- The role of certain bacteria like VEnterococcus (enhanced by Urso) and Blautia in improving overall survival (OS) after Allo-HSCT.
- The negative impact of certain therapies, such as Piperacillin-Tazobactam-Imipenem (P-I-M) but not cefepime, on overall survival and progression-free survival when administered four weeks prior to a Chimeric Antigen Receptor T-cell Infusion (CAR-T infusion).
